21
Love Is My Only Wealth
Embodiments of Love!
THERE are many persons who analyse and
investigate into the nature of divinity, but very few
understand it in its true spirit. Those who perceive it
are truly fortunate ones. In fact, it is not possible to
comprehend divinity in its fullness. However, the man
who realizes the same atmic principle in others as he
experiences it in himself can understand divinity,
irrespective of the fact whether he is a householder or a
renunciant. In such a person, divinity is firmly established.
He becomes divinity itself.
A millionaire can eat food only and not gold.
This is the principle of equality of mankind. God is in
everybody. Divinity is immanent in equal measure in
everything—good or bad, righteous or unrighteous,
sacred or unsacred. Since ancient times, sages have
been trying to investigate this mystery. The Vedic sage
declared: Vedahametam Aditya varnam Tamasa Parastat
(I know the Cosmic Being who shines with the
effulgence of a billion suns and who is beyond darkness).
In modern times, scholars investigate into the
nature of divinity according to their own perceptions
and propound manifold theories.
Divinity Permeates The Entire Universe
The universe is subject to three processes:
creation, sustenance and destruction or dissolution.
None can deny this truth; scientists also cannot negate
it. This is a universal truth perceived by everybody.
That which is born is sustained and is eventually
destroyed. This is the direct proof of divinity. When
you enquire into these three fundamental facts, the
existence of divinity becomes evident. In daily life
also, this divinity is experienced. For example, you
have seen the dancing lions from Malaysia (a Malaysian
troupe presented their traditional lion dance before
Swami’s Discourse in Hill View Stadium on 23 November
2000). However, these are not real lions. But on
seeing them, you can surmise that there exist real creatures
called lions. In a similar manner, almost every
object of daily life points towards divinity. The sweetness
in the sugarcane or the hot taste of chillies, the
sour taste in tamarind or the bitter taste of neem, all
these are indicators of divinity. The stars in the sky, the
brightness of the sun, the coolness of the moon and the
rise and fall of sea waves are also pointers towards the
divine principle. Though all these do not directly show
you God per se, they produce positive evidence of the
existence of the divine principle.
In society, there are different functionaries like
a minister for education, a collector for revenue and the
police for law and order, etc., and above all of them is
the Prime Minister. In the same way, in the universe,
there is Brahma for creation, Vishnu for protection and
Shiva for dissolution. But, for all these functions, the
supreme head is divinity. The Muslims call this
principle, Allah. Every religious denomination has its
own name for divinity. The Bharatiyas and Westerners
have a common term in English, God. In this word, G
stands for generation, i.e., creation, O for organization,
i.,e sustenance and D for dissolution. Thus in this word
God, all these three aspects, namely, creation,
sustenance and dissolution are implied. Taking such
evidence, people have been propagating the principle
of divinity. Stated or unstated, truth is truth. God
exists. Where is He? He is omnipresent. He is in all
forms. The divinity present in humanity is self-evident.
The very fact that lakhs of you have come here today is
the evidence of your love for God. Love is the proof of
divinity. You have filled your hearts with love for
Bhagawan. There is no greater bliss than this.
Experience Your Inner Reality
Embodiments of Love!
Any task undertaken with self-confidence is
absolutely essential for every person. If you expect
others to respect and love you, you should first respect
and love them. Without respecting or loving others,
you cannot expect any reciprocal feeling from them. In
the same way, if you love God, God loves you. Life
consists of reaction, resound and reflection. You get
back exactly what you do to others.
What message can I give you for the day? As I
see you, My heart overflows with love. When I see so
many of you expressing your love for Me, there is no
limit to My joy. I have not sent out invitations to any
of you. My love has drawn you here. Your love for
God and God’s love for you is the true message. What
can one say as a message? I give and you receive, and
you give and I receive. This exchange is the true
relationship between man and God. Be happy and
blissful. Increase your spiritual dimensions. Live with
the firm conviction that there is one Divinity resident
in all.
Why does a Government set up law enforcing
agencies like the police and military? It is solely for
the sake of protecting the country. The police punishes
the guilty. If there is no lawbreaker, there is no need
for police at all. In the same manner, your bad actions
attract punishment and your good actions, reward. This
is the theory of karma. But one blames God, if one is
punished. This is a big mistake. Ensure that there is no
trace of evil within you. Then you need not worrry
about any punishment. The very persons designated for
punishing you will come and protect you.
“Have Faith In Yourself”
I have said that man is the embodiment of the
atma. I have also told you that the atma is
imperishable. This eternal entity indicates your
eternity. Creation, sustenance, and dissolution are all
ordained by God. He manifests in all the elements.
With this firm conviction, wherever you go, to
whatever country you travel, you will attain success.
Spiritual precept insists, “Have faith in yourself.” That
is, first of all, know yourself. Everybody asks the
question, “Who are you?” There is none to ask, “Who
am I?” When the question, “Who are you?” is asked, a
reply that you are so and so or you are from such and
such place or you are doing such and such job is not
the proper answer. “I am the atma,” is the only right
answer. The body and the mind are impermanent. To
imagine that you are any of these is a serious mistake.
Get rid of the feeling that you are the body and the
mind and recognise the atma, which alone gives power
to both the body and the mind to function. Everyone is
a manifestation of the atma. This manifestation has
expanded all over. This all-pervading atmic principle is
the cosmic principle. You should attempt to recognise
this Cosmic Power. You may feel that this is very
difficult, but it is extremely simple. Your body
attachment is what makes it appear difficult. Sarva
Bhuta Namaskaram Kesavam Pratigachchati (salutations
to all beings ultimately reach God) because
God is present in everyone. In the Bhagavadgita, lord
Krishna says, Mamaivamsho Jeevaloke Jeevabhuta
Sanathana (the eternal atma in all beings is a part of
My Being).
Unity In Creation; Duality Is In Perception
If the bird enters a hall of mirrors, it sees many
reflections of its own form. It imagines that there are a
multitude of birds and they are its competitors. So, it
keeps dashing against the mirrors and the mirrors are
broken into pieces. Now, it sees as many birds as there
are pieces of mirrors. When the mirrors are all shattered
to tiny bits, no image is visible and the bird flies
away. This is a state of ignorance. On the contrary,
when a man of wisdom enters the room, he recognises
that these are all his own images and feels happy.
In the same manner, the one who sees himself
in all other persons and looks on them as his own
images is a true human being. The manifest principle
that is visible in the external world is the same as that
which exists in an individual. Names, forms and
abilities are cognized as separate, but these are mere
reflections. The truth is that I and you are one.
Divinity is right inside you and is not separate. Nor is
it specially located in a temple or a mosque or any
other place of worship. What you try to see in a
mosque or a temple is inside you. All sadhana is
undertaken to experience this inner reality.
Every man is prone to birth and death. The
period between birth and death is man’s life-span. The
individual grows and wears away but his inner spirit
does not undergo any change. It is only the body which
undergoes changes. A child grows up to become an
adult and a grandfather. Descriptions are different, but
the individual is the same. In the same manner, God
has many names and forms but divinity is only one.
Ekam Sath Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (truth is one but
scholars refer to it by many names). Realising this
truth, you should respect and love all and give joy to
all. Then you become God yourself. Once you
recognise the fact that the divinity in all is the same,
there will be no sense of duality. You may think that it
is very difficult but is extremely simple. Your inability
to recognise this truth is due to the fault of your vision
and not the fault of creation. Without correcting your
faulty vision, you blame the creation. There are no
flaws in creation. There is unity in creation; duality is
in your perception.
Self-confidence Is The Key To Success In Life
With self-confidence, any task can be
performed successfully; a small example. Abraham
Lincoln was born in an extremely poor family in
America. His father was a carpenter. His mother Nancy
worked hard to educate him. When Lincoln went to
school, other children made fun of him for his dress
and poverty. Lincoln could not bear this and told his
mother, “Mother, I am subjected to a lot of ridicule by
fellow-students. Please get me a good dress.” Taking
him close, his mother said, “Son, you must see our
condition first. We are not well-to-do. Feeding all of us
itself is a problem. In this condition, how can you
expect fancy clothes? Act according to your condition.
Sooner or later, you will reach the level of your
deservedness. Don’t be deterred by other people’s
taunts. Live with self-confidence. Self-confidence is
the source of all success.” Thus, she encouraged him.
From that moment, Lincoln became a person of great
self-confidence and pursued his studies and activities
with honest effort. He was never upset over anything.
Self-confidence was his armour. Devoid of material
wealth and comforts, he was endowed with plenty of
self-confidence.
The Difficult Days Of Young Lincoln
His mother passed away after sometime. But
her words of wisdom were firmly entrenched in his
heart. His father married again. It is quite common
amongst Westerners. His stepmother was also quite
affectionate towards Lincoln and encouraged him to
persevere on the path shown by his mother. Life was
difficult for him throughout. He wanted to have some
employment. However, he thought that self-reliance
was better than serving others and started a business of
his own. He conducted his business in the most upright
manner. But his difficulties went on increasing and his
debts accumulated. Lincoln carried on with the
strength of his mother’s advice regardless of all
difficulties. He had a severe setback in his business.
Ultimately, he had to sell everything. He worked hard
to clear all his debts.
There is no disease like being debtor,
There is no charity greater than feeding
the hungry,
There is no grater god than parents,
There is no greater Dharma than
compassion,
There is no greater gain than the
company of the good,
There is no enemy greater than anger,
There is no wealth greater than good reputation,
Bad reputation is death itself.
There is no ornament better than the
chanting of God’s name.
(Telegu Poem)
Lincoln strictly lived in this manner. Seeing his
upright character, some of his friends felt that he could
very easily be elected to the state legislature. They
advised him to stand for election and promised their
help. Lincoln stood for election and won with a
thumping majority. By his honesty and hard work, he
rose to become the President of the United States of
America. At the moment of his success, he recollected
his mother’s words. He fully realized the importance of
self-confidence.
The slaves were treated in a very harsh manner
by the Whites in those days. Abraham Lincoln wanted
to ameliorate their condition and secure equal rights
for them. He was of the firm conviction that all human
beings were equal and any differences on the basis of
colour or race were improper. He tirelessly worked for
the cause of the slaves. Eventually, he succeeded in the
abolition of slavery in the United States. He is still held
in high esteem for this noble work.
Do Not Attach Any Importance To Any Criticism
In the world, there is a constant strife between
good and evil. There are many people who are jealous
of others and subject them to slander. But one should
not attach any importance to such criticism. Praise and
abuse are common to mankind. In Bharat also several
famous people faced similar difficulties but they
overcame these with fortitude. If you live in truth and
love, you will not come to harm. The body is bound to
fall some time or the other. Merely to safeguard it, one
should not take to bad ways. Body is perishable while
truth is eternal. Hence, strive for truth. There is nothing
greater than truth.
The creation emerges from Truth and it
merges into Truth,
Is there a place where truth does not
exist?
This alone is Absolute Truth.
(Telegu Poem)
The Four Kinds Of People Who Oppose God
There are some, who turn away from the path
of goodness and start opposing God when their desires
are not fulfilled. But the mistake lies with them and not
with God. There are four kinds of people who oppose
God.
The first type of people are atheists, who
profess that there is no God. In the second category
come those people who speak against God out of
jealousy because others are better off than them. The
third, those who lament at the high reputation and fame
of others which they are unable to achieve themselves.
The fourth type are those who are disillusioned when
their desires are not fulfilled. They resort to improper
and mean ways to attain their ends. They ask, “Swami,
I am starting a school or a society and I need so much
money.” I tell them the truth, “Son, this is a different
country from yours. The currency of this country
cannot be carried in your country. If you resort to
illegal methods and cheat the Government, I shall
never permit such a practice.” Under such
circumstances, they go back to their places and make
all kinds of false allegations against Me. Whatever
others may say, I will never deviate from the path of
Truth. Do not pay any attention to praise or slander.
Divinity is based on faith. Faith is something which
cannot be bestowed on you. Everyone has his own
faith.
There are a few who say that God does not
exist.
For those who refuse to believe, there is no
God.
For those with faith, there is God.
‘Yes’ and ‘No’ belong to others;
For Bhagawan, it is always ‘yes, yes, yes.’
(Telugu Poem)
Welfare Of Humanity Is Bhagawan’s Primary
Concern
Each individual’s conscience is his own
witness. Do not waste your energy on negative
criticism. You should never abandon your faith and
your self-confidence. Some people become jealous at
the growth and prosperity of others. Jealousy is a
dangerous pest. If a pest enters the root of a tree full of
leaves, fruits and flowers, the entire tree dies quickly.
The pest is not visible to the eye and works insidiously.
A jealous person conceals his jealousy and
harms others like a pest. These are evil ways. However,
in My view, there are no evil persons. All evil
behaviour changes sooner or later. My truth is one. All
belong to Me and I belong to all. My only wealth is
love. I embrace all with love. Even people who come
to Me with hatred in their hearts are dear to Me. I do
not search for your faults. I go by the principle of love.
All should take note of My equanimity and follow this
principle of unity. Purity follows unity and from
purity, divinity is attained. To attain divinity, you have
to cultivate purity and for purity you should live in
harmony with all. Only then will you get positive
results.
Embodiments of Love!
Today marks the 75th year of the Advent of this
body. Age does not concern Me. Welfare of humanity
is My only concern. More particularly, I am concerned
about the welfare of the distressed and the poor. My
primary objective of life is to remove the difficulties of
the helpless. Irrespective of any comments, adverse or
otherwise, My resolve is the same. You should also
make a resolution on these lines.
Having grasped what ought to be grasped,
Do not let go of the grip till you succeed.
Having desired what ought to be desired,
Hold on till your desire is fulfilled.
Having asked what ought to be asked,
Hold on till you obtain what you had
asked for.
Having thought what ought to be thought,
Hold on till you succeed.
Either God should yield to your prayer
or you should ask wholeheartedly with
intensity.
This is the path a true devotee should
pursue.
(Telugu Poem)
True Qualities Of A Good Individual
Have perseverance until your resolve is
fulfilled. This is the vow of a bhakta (devotee). This is
what can be called as true tapas. Tapas does not mean
going to the forest or standing upside down and doing
some meditation or the other. Keep your word, adhere
to truth, show gratitude where due and stay firm in
your self-confidence. These are the true qualities of a
good individual. If you adhere to these tenets, you will
overcome with ease any obstacle that may come your
way. Hold on to your self-confidence and self-respect
and be ready for any sacrifice. As I have already
reiterated, the atma in everyone is the same. Therefore,
do not be swayed by such considerations as somebody
being small and somebody being great, etc. Selfconfidence
is not related to age. Quantity may vary
between individuals, but quality is the same.
Unity Safeguards Independence
Embodiments of Love!
If Bharat is to progress in the proper direction,
there should be complete unity amongst all its people.
Our great leaders made great sacrifices and secured
freedom for us. While we have attained Independence,
we have not achieved unity. What is the use of
freedom without unity? It is due to lack of unity that
people of this country are reduced to a sorry state of
affairs. There is hatred everywhere. There are ten
factions in one party. People of one house go in four
different directions. If this kind of disunity persists,
how can freedom be safeguarded? People are not going
on the right path. You have to adopt the path of
complete unity, so that every Bharatiya must be able to
say proudly: “This is my beloved country, this is my
mother tongue and my religion.” You should also
uphold the reputation and traditions of your family.
People today have lost faith. A man without
faith is verily blind. If you do not have faith in others,
at least have faith in yourself. Develop faith in yourself
and faith in God. This is the secret of greatness. Only
then will you be able to experience divinity. God does
not have a separate form. ‘I,’ the atma, is God. You
must have this kind of faith. Only then can you
accomplish spiritual growth.
Bharat is a sacred land. Such sacredness is
hardly found anywhere else in the world. That is why
many avatars have taken birth in this land: Bharat is
like a mother of all other nations. Rama said, “Janani
Janma Bhumishcha Swargadapi Gareeyasi” (mother
and motherland are greater than even paradise). You
must recognise this truth. There are many who chant
the Name of Rama, but is there anyone who actually
practises the virtues represented by Rama? People are
heroes in chanting but zeros in practice.
The Vedas have given four Mahavakyas:
Tattwam Asi (That thou art), Prajnanam Brahma
(constant integrated awareness is Brahman), Aham
Brahmasmi (I am Brahman) and Ayam Atma Brahma
(this Atma is Brahman). You are constantly chanting
these words but are not putting them into practice.
Mere chanting without action is pure exhibitionism.
While saying all are Brahman, you hate others. This is
sheer hypocrisy. If you have aversion to any
individual, quietly keep away from him. Do not hate
him; try to develop love for him. Do not criticize or
hate anybody. This is My message today. This is the
course to be adopted by you. I love everybody. I have
no dislike for anybody. All are My devotees, friends
and children. For Me, all are one. This universe is a big
book. Antaratma (conscience) is your Guru. God is
your friend. Time is also the very form of God.
Therefore, do not waste time. Time wasted is life
wasted. To make your time pure is true sadhana.
My Love Is The Purest
Embodiments of Love!
The love in you and the love in Me are one and
the same. But your love is contaminated by desires for
material things. I have no desire for any material
wealth. My love is the purest. The love immanent in
you turns negative because of the contamination of
desires. There is no negative quality in Me, it is
entirely positive. So, combine the negative ‘I’ in you
with the positive in Me and attain unity. With this
understanding, you will be able to experience indescribable
bliss. What sort of bliss? That is Brahmananda.
When you experience this Brahmananda, you
become one with Brahman. In this state, there is no
need for any sadhana on your part. All the sadhanas
that you do are for your mental satisfaction. Consider
all as one and love all. That is the true sadhana. Ek
Prabhu Ke Anek Nam (God has many names but He is
One). While performing the Sahasranama Archana
(chanting 1000 names of God), you repeat the various
names, Keshava, Madhava, Narayana, Govinda, but it
is to the same form that you make your offerings.
Transform Negative Thoughts Into Positive Ones
While doing Anga Puja, you place the flower
on your eye and then offer the flower to the deity in
front with the Mantra,“Nethra Pushpam Samarpayami”
(I offer the flower of my eye). Symbolically,
you are offering a flower in place of the eye. You say
eye, but offer a flower. This amounts to cheating God
Himself. What is the point of offering to God what has
been provided by God Himself? You should pray, “O
God, everything is Yours, this whole body is Yours, all
the limbs and organs are Yours. I am Yours and You
are mine.” When this kind of identity is established,
there is no further need for any external form of
worship. But, for those who have not yet reached this
exalted state, these various physical forms of sadhana
such as japa, tapa and dhyana are suitable. All these
require constant practice. Gradually remove all negative
thoughts and inculcate positive thoughts. Transform
negative thoughts into positive ones.
If anybody abuses you, take no note, for the
abuser is abusing only the body and not your Self. If
somebody calls you a bad man, do you become a bad
man by the mere calling? If, in fact, you have
something bad in you, try to destroy it. There are a
large number of people in this Kali Yuga who abuse
God because their wishes are not fulfilled. This is a
universal habit common to all countries. You should
not succumb to such mean and unholy feelings.
Thyagaraja, for example, says that God will reveal
Himself to you only to the extent and manner in which
you approach Him. Whichever way you think of Him,
God assumes the same form. If your feelings are good,
you will get good results.
Embodiments of Love!
I have no desire to have such elaborate Birthday
celebrations, not in the least. I go through all these
because it pleases My devotees. I am not particularly
enamoured of anything. The happiness of the devotees
is My happiness. Dedicate your life to divine love.
Love is the very form of Brahman.
Try to merge love in love.
If you have steady love, you will achieve
the ultimate merger which is true
non-duality.
(Telugu Poem)
All That Happens Is For Your Good
Hatred, jealousy and ostentation have become
widespread these days. Get rid of all these and adopt
the path of love. Whether your desires are fulfilled or
not, think that all that happens is for your good. When
you encounter difficulties, always think that better
days are ahead. Good and bad always go together.
Therefore, take both of them with the same attitude.
The Gita says, “Sukhadukhe Samekruthwa Labhalabhau
Jayajayau” (treat happiness and sorrow, loss
and gain, victory and defeat with complete equanimity).
Pleasure is an interval between two pains.
Reduce your worldly desires. Develop desire for God.
Inculcate love for God and thereby increase your
happiness. If desires increase, your suffering also
increases, and happiness too decreases proportionately.
Bhagawan Wants Only Your Love
You cannot attain God by your wealth. He is to
be attained only through devotion. Sathyabhama in her
pride hoped to possess Krishna all for herself by her
wealth. She wanted to weigh Him against the huge
amount of gold she possessed. But she failed. Narada
made her realize her folly by showing that a single leaf
of Tulasi (basil) offered by Rukmini with real devotion
exceeded all the wealth of Sathyabhama. Sathyabhama
symbolises desire while Rukmini represents devotion.
Krishna says that He is pleased with the offering of a
leaf, a flower, a fruit or water. Do not take this literally.
The body is the leaf; the flower, the flower of your
heart; your mind, the fruit; and the tears of joy, the
water, which is the acceptable offering to God.
Embodiments of Love!
You will have everything in life if you have
love in you. Do not hate anybody. This should be the
main ideal of your life. This is My message for you.
Love is My only wealth. All these magnificent edifices
are not Mine; they all belong to the devotees. The only
property I own is unbounded love for all of you. I am
ready to sacrifice even my very body for the sake of
my devotees. You live happily and spend your life in a
state of bliss. I want only your love. Your love makes
me happy. My love is your greatest wealth and good
fortune. This is My greatest gift for you. Take good
care of this precious gift. This is My blessing to you on
this day. May you all have steady devotion, and sacred,
long, happy life! May you have all this! May all your
difficulties be removed! May you experience unalloyed
bliss!
Birthday, 23-11-2000, Prasanthi Nilayam