
Embodiments of Divine Love, Students-Boys and Girls!
Patrons of Education and Educational Administrators!
True education is that which teaches us
The way to achieve world peace
By removing narrow-mindedness
And inculcating unity, fraternity and
equality.
(Telugu Poem)
TODAY what the world needs is neither wealth
nor any materialistic advancement. It needs students
who are ideal and who work for the welfare of society.
The field of education today is plagued by problems
which confuse everybody. We rarely find students
working for the welfare of society and strengthening
Sathya Sai Speaks, Volume 33 320
its moral fabric. Today students struggle to acquire
power, position and wealth. They do not put in any
effort to inculcate virtues in themselves. It is a mistake
to think that service is for someone else. In fact, it is
service to oneself and to God. Sarvata Pani-Padam Tat
Sarvathokshi Siromukham, Sarvata Sruthimalloke Sarvamavruthya
Thishthati (with hands, feet, head, mouth
and ears pervading everything, God permeates the
entire universe).
Recognise The Truth Of Your Divinity
There is one power that pervades both
microcosm and macrocosm. That power is the Cosmic
Divine. The divine consciousness present in you is the
same as that present in all. The whole world is filled
with this divine consciousness. People who realize this
eternal truth will not tread the wrong path. Forms are
many but the divine power is one. Therefore, man
should endeavour to recognise his innate divinity.
Today there are millions of scholars and intellectuals.
Have they done anything good for society? They
promote only their selfishness and self-interest. Rarely
do we find such people working for the welfare of the
country. Only when selfishness is removed completely
from the nature of men will there be purity in the
country.
The body, mind and intellect alone do not make
The body, mind and intellect alone do not make
a man. They are the vestures put on by man. The body
is inert. The mind is negative. Man considers himself
to be a combination of the inert body and negative
mind. But man is eternal and changeless. ‘Man’ lives
eternally at all times and in all states of existence.
Whatever you hear, talk, think and act is the reflection
of the inner being. You may consider yourself to be
highly educated. It is merely the reflection of the inner
divine. The studies you undertake are merely
reflection, reaction and resound and cannot be
considered as true education. All these shall diminish
in their value in course of time. Humanness is
permanent and has no birth or death. This body is
bound to change but the ‘man’ never dies. You take
man to be the embodied being who is subject to birth
and death. The permanent man lies in humanness and
is imperishable. The other name of man is ‘Nara’ (one
who does not perish). The atma does not change.
Why then do you fear death when you are the
embodiment of the Self? You are the eternal truth.
Being the embodiment of truth and eternity, why do
you go after these changing and temporary things?
Today’s education can confer only worldly comforts.
Besides secular education, one should acquire the
knowledge of the atma. You can experience the divine
power, which is all-pervasive. This is called the Cosmic
Divine. Many scientists have experimented a lot to
discover this power. But what is the outcome? They
tend to discover what is transient and worldly. You
should try to recognise the oneness of the divine power
that pervades the entire universe. Once you recognise
this truth, you will never be subjected to worries.
The power that pervades the whole universe is
also in your little finger. You doubt this fact, go by the
name and form and enfeeble yourself. Once you
transcend the name and form and realize the divine
energy, you get enormous strength.
Divine Energy Is The Basis Of Life
Embodiments of Love!
Love is the basis of life in this world.
There is nothing which you cannot accomplish
with love.
It is the power of love that makes the
earth revolve without the support of
any axle.
It is the power of love that holds the stars
in their positions without falling down.
It is the power of love that withholds the
oceans from submerging the earth.
It is the power of love that makes the
wind blow over the seven worlds.
This sacred love is eternal, most amazing
and indivisible.
That love is the life-breath of man.
(Telugu poem)
Without love, mankind cannot exist. Humanness
is not based on the form alone. In fact, we can
consider all beings to be divine. But man is carried
away by the differences in form. When you realize the
oneness of all these forms, you can enjoy eternal bliss.
Therefore, it is important to start practising this principle
of unity in your lives.
What is the use of all your learning
when it does not help you to change
your destiny?
When bad thoughts enter your mind,
All your education and intelligence
become futile and meaningless.
(Telugu Poem)
No Difference Between Manava And Madhava
Therefore, you should never entertain bad
thoughts. You should recognise the purity present in
humanity. Fire burns everything. Cosmic Divine is like
fire. It is present everywhere and incinerates all evil to
ashes. Mind makes the man. But man can be transformed
into the divine. Thus, there is no difference
between manava (man) and madhava (divinity). The
power latent in you is the same as in God. Because of
his physical form, man appears to be different. Never
be carried away by these forms. Put your faith in the
divine power. The manas (mind), the buddhi (intellect),
the chitta (limited human consciousness) and the
antahkarana (inner instrument) appear to be different.
But the energy that activates them all is one. All are
nothing but consciousness. Because of his narrow
vision, man is unable to perceive these verities.
Men Are Many, But The Consciousness Is One
Embodiments of Love!
Never hate anyone, because the principle of
love is immanent in all. Divine energy too is present in
all. Never criticize or denigrate anyone. Love all. That
itself is divine consciousness which transforms into
divine power. Therefore, never give scope to bad
thoughts. With pure conviction declare that you are the
Cosmic Divine present in all. Many people take recourse
to many spiritual practices without understanding
their own innate divinity.
Neither by penance nor by pilgrimage
nor by study of scriptures nor by Japa
can one cross the ocean of life.
One can achieve it only by serving the
pious
(Sanskrit Verse)
So, enter the path of service. Divinity is the
same in all. There is no duality in the universe. The
Vedas proclaim: “Ekam Sath Viprah bahudha vadanti.”
(truth is one, but scholars refer to it by many
names). Though the bulbs are many, the current is one.
Dresses may be many but the cloth is one. Men are
many, but the consciousness is one. This is universal
consciousness or the Cosmic Divine. Universal consciousness
gets limited to individual consciousness by
man’s attachment to the physical form. Consciousness
is one, but man is cultivating differences on the basis
of forms.
Jewels are many, but gold is one;
Cows are many, but milk is one;
Beings are many, but the breath is one;
Castes are many, humanity is one;
(Telugu Poem)
Science has also to recognise this oneness of
universal consciousness. There is only unity in this
universe. Man sees plurality on the basis of names and
forms. Once he transcends names and forms, he can
experience unity. Since he has been experiencing duality
on the basis of names and forms, he sees plurality
and gets deluded. There should be no scope for doubt,
hatred or anger. Realise that everything is love.
Imbibing in yourself this principle of love, you should
serve others with the feeling that you are serving God
Himself. Lead your life inspired by such sacred ideals.
Transcend The Mind To Attain Equanimity
There is an inner being in man which is his
subtle body. Body consciousness is related to the gross
body; it can overshadow the inner subtle body which
comprises the mind, the intellect, the chitta and the
antahkarana. One has to transcend this body consciousness
and rise to the level of Higher Consciousness
which is also termed as Over Mind. This Higher
Consciousness experiences everything but is not
attached to anything. As long as the mind exists, it is
not possible to enter the realms of Higher Consciousness.
It is said, “Mano Moolam Idam Jagat” ( the
mind is the basis for the universe). The mind pervades
the entire universe. It sees names and forms and the
duality of the material world. If you go beyond the
material life, you can experience what is called `vibration
life.’ This higher state is also termed as Super
Mind. In this state of Super Mind, you experience
equanimity. The state of equanimity is true Vedanta.
There can be no happiness without equanimity.
The Vedas declare:
Saha Navavathu Saha Nau Bhunakthu
Saha Veeryam Karavavahai
Tejaswi Navadheethamasthu
Ma Vidvisavahai”
(May the Lord protect and nourish us! May we
grow in intelligence and valour working
together! May we live in friendship without
hatred!)
The primary teaching of the Vedas is cultivation
of unity. The Vedas teach the principle of
oneness. But there is no unity in the world today.
Students!
Today is the day of Convocation when you all
receive degrees. These degrees are also some kind of
titles. Of what use are such titles if you have to beg in
order to live? Your education is not for this. Secular
knowledge is for earning your livelihood. It is through
spiritual knowledge that you attain the supreme bliss.
But as long as you live at the level of the mind, you
have to pursue secular studies. The moment you
transcend the mind, this education can be overlooked.
Man ascends to the Divine by transcending his mind.
One should cultivate the Cosmic Mind.
Westerners refer to it as the Cosmic Power. They have
come upon this truth now, while the Bharatiyas have
known it for centuries. But having known the truth,
they have not been able to put it into practice. Man has
become zero in practice. Only through practice can you
realize the atma.
Divine Energy Pervades Everything
Everything is governed by the Divine Will.
Whatever happens in this world is only the Divine
Drama. He who understands this is truly a man of
wisdom. The atma is the true nature of man.What is
the atma? What is chaitanya? They are all aspects of
energy, which has no form. While the current is without
any form, a bulb, a fan or an electric stove has a
definite form. In each appliance, it does have a different
function. If you say, “Oh current, how helpful you
have been to me!” and touch it, you get a shock.
Current has that energy and hence it is a form of the
Cosmic Divine.
This is also illustrated in the story of Bhasmasura
who could reduce anything to ashes through the
power he had acquired from the Divine by penance.
This inner energy expresses itself in the form of
knowl-edge. Knowledge has to be transformed into
skill to achieve balance in life. But people today are
killing this knowledge thereby losing their balance. By
losing balance in their lives, they acquire only outward
vision and do not cultivate inner vision or insight.
When your outlook is projected outwards, your mind
starts wavering. You should maintain balance in life. It
is possible only when you transform your knowedlege
into skill. For this, you should get rid of all bad feelings
and shun body attachment. All the suffering in the
world is due to body attachment. You should cultivate
attachment to the atma. Many people may feel why
Bhagawan teaches all these to the youngsters. Actually,
it is very important to everyone—be it a youngster,
middle-aged man or an old one.
Start Early, Drive Slowly And Reach Safely
Man wastes his childhood in fun and
frolic.
In youth, his life is wasted by indulging
in sensual pleasures.
In middle age, man submerges himself in
materalistic pursuits and struggles all
the time to earn wealth.
In old age, he laments over the lack of
this or that and does not think of God.
Without any interest in the path of
devotion,
He is bogged down in the cycle of cause
and effect and thus ruins his life.
(Telugu Poem)
Start early, drive slowly and reach safely. Start
making efforts even when you are still young. What
will you gain if you waste all your energy in your
youth and then start thinking about God in old age?
Everything Is Reflection, Reaction And Resound
Students! Boys and Girls!
Realise that the cosmic energy present in
everyone is the same. Everything is Universal Cosmic
Power. This is referred to as Divine Cosmic Power.
This Divine Cosmic Power is present within ourselves
and we need not seek it outside. In this world, all the
energy that we see, all the energy that we study and all
the energy that we hear of, is within us. Anything that
you do not have within yourselves does not exist
anywhere else. Everything is reflection, reaction and
resound. Every human is divine. When you realize this
truth, all your troubles and worries vanish. When body
attachment increases, worries also increase. On this
basis it is said—‘Less luggage, more comfort, make
travel a pleasure’. Vedanta refers to this as ‘renunciation’.
Renunciation does not mean giving up home
and hearth and going to forest. It means experiencing
the unity of all beings. You imagine all the differences.
They do not exist really. All that you study is borrowed
knowledge. All this education is required in the
material world. You should acquire it only as much as
is necessary.
Can you call a person educated just because he
knows how to read and write? Are you an educated
person just because you have acquired a college
degree? No. Can education without good feelings and
good mind be called ‘true education?’ If education is
merely for a living, then are not the animals and birds
living? Education is for life, it is not for a living.
Without realizing this truth, men put themselves in
many snares for the sake of eking out a livelihood.
Secular Education And Spiritual Knowledge
Embodiments of Love!
Having been born as human, we should
recognise the divine energy within us. We should
experience this divine energy. Today what we have to
share and spread is bliss and not misery. Human life is
highly sacred. Secular education is also important. You
should try to acquire it with certain limits. Otherwise,
why should we establish colleges and educational
institutions?
Secular knowledge is essential for your welfare
in this world. But for the welfare hereafter, the knowledge
of Brahman is essential. Secular education is
merely for the body and not for life. It cannot help you
to understand the nature of the atma. There is no greater
education than the one which helps you to understand
the nature of the atma.
Why can’t you recognise your own truth
instead of knowing so much about others? You enquire
of others ‘who are you?’ Instead of that, you should
enquire ‘who am I?’ Of what use is knowing about
others when you do not know who you are? When you
know yourself, you will easily understand others. The
same principle is immanent in you and others. It is the
all-pervading universal consciousness. You should
recognise this divine energy. Then you will not have
any suffering or misery. Bhagawan states this from His
own experience. My life is My message. I am always
blissful. I have no worries. People greet me ‘Happy
Birthday.’ Greet others who are not happy. Worries
come and go. They are like passing clouds. Why then
do you fear? Body is bound to perish one day or the
other. It is like a water bubble. Mind is like a mad
monkey. Why do you follow it? Follow the conscience,
which is eternal. That is the goal of your life.
Everyone in this world seeks happiness. This bliss is
within you. Human body is made up of five sheaths.
Annamaya kosha (food sheath) relates to the physical
body. The subtle body comprises pranamaya kosha
(life sheath), manomaya kosha (mind sheath) and
vijnanamaya kosha (wisdom sheath). Anandamaya
kosha (The ultimate sheath of bliss) is one’s goal of
life. The vijnanamaya kosha should not be confused
with science.
When Ego Enters, Love Vanishes
The body undergoes changes in four stages:
childhood, youth, middleage and old age. But you
remain unchanged. You introduce yourself as ‘I’ when
enquired by others in all the stages of your life. This ‘I’
is a single letter. You attach many decorations to it.
Cross the ‘I,’ i.e., feeling of body consciousness or
ego. The Christian Cross is a symbol for the elimination
of ego. When the feeling of ‘I’ is eliminated,
the ego vanishes and you become God. You should
understand and experience the real nature of ‘I’.
Your life is full of love. Anything may change
but love does not change. Being born and brought up
in love, we are full of love. Cut your ego and cultivate
love. When ego enters, love vanishes. Do not give any
scope for ego to enter. When you recognise the purity
of love, you will get rid of your faults. Everything is
based on pure and selfless love. In fact, love is divine.
But you ignore this divinity. This is the biggest
mistake.
Human body will perish one day or the other.
Don’t go by the body. It is only an instrument. The
strength that lies in the body is yours. When you
recognise this power, you will become divine. “Master
the mind and be a mastermind.” Do not become a
slave, but become the master.
Students have to pursue secular education as it
helps them to earn their livelihood. You also have to
fulfil the hopes and aspirations of your parents and
make them happy.
Along with secular education, spiritual
education is also necessary. This type of education
confers happiness and peace on you. Develop sacred
and good feelings and live a noble life. Make your
parents happy. Never trouble them. It is they who
gave you life and brought you up. If possible, try to
explain to your parents the noble and good things you
have learnt here. The Vedas say, “Mathru Devo Bhava,
Pithru Devo Bhava…” So, consider your parents as
God. With good conduct and behaviour earn a good
name in this world.
There Is Only One Reality That Exists
The knowledge acquired by you should make
you recognise your inner being. Secular education is
like a passing cloud. It comes and goes. The reality
which is within is eternal principle. Hold on to it and
strengthen your faith. You have already acquired good
and high education. On this Convocation day, my only
advice to you is to put it into practice. Share with
others what you have learnt and derive happiness
therefrom. The Union Minister, Dr. Murali Manohar
Joshi, is a highly educated and knowledgeable person.
He has told you many good things. How far have you
understood them? If you are able to understand even
one principle mentioned by him, it will transform your
life. A single matchstick is enough to burn any
quantity of matter.
There is only one reality that exists. If you
realize this, you can achieve anything. It is only the
body attachment that obstructs your vision. In a house
you have different rooms like drawing room, dining
room, bathroom, kitchen, etc. Each room is separated
from the other by a wall existing between them. If you
remove these walls, you will find only one big hall.
Similarly, when you remove the walls of body consciousness,
you will develop a broad mind.
Education Should Be Free
You have studied in this institute for many
years. When you go out, teach others what you have
learnt here and be a role model. Lead an exemplary life
and be happy. Your happiness is My happiness. I do
not expect anything other than this from you.
The Minister has said that there is only one
way to keep the students on the right path. I too agree
with him. That is purity. It alone guides you in the
right way. Our students are not paying any tuition fee,
laboratory fee or examination fee. They come here
empty-handed and go out with immense wealth of
education. They learn here humility, discipline and
faith. Education should confer humility. In other
institutions, many students do not possess this quality
of humility. Those students pay fees. So, the teachers
and authorities are not able to question the students and
correct them. Since the authorities are collecting
money for providing education, they are afraid of
taking any disciplinary action against the students.
Educational institutions, which are supposed to be
Saraswati Mandirs (centres of learning) have turned
into Lakshmi Mandirs (centres of money). Money is
able to purchase even degrees. Admission, attendance
and, it is said, even promotion to a higher class is
possible on payment of money.
In My opinion, Government should provide
free education to all students. It is spending crores or
rupees on many programmes. Collection of fees from
students cannot add to Government revenue much.
Provide free education to the children and they will be
good. Education which is purchased can lead only to
agitation. Unable to secure jobs with purchased
degrees, some students even put an end to their lives.
The Government is responsible for this. Only free
education will develop good relationship between the
people and the Government.
Our Students Are Like Pure Unalloyed Gold
We at Prasanthi Nilayam do not collect even a
paisa from any student in our institutes. Not only do
we provide free education, scholarships are also given
to our students as an encouragement and reward. Our
students develop an unwavering mind and make their
parents happy. They lead a happy life. They are pure at
heart. They do not possess any evil feelings. Leaving
aside a negligible minority, they are like pure
unalloyed gold. They do not like to leave the Institute
and Swami even after they finish their education.
But some students have to leave the Institute
after finishing their education. Parents wish to live
with their children. So, they have to obey them and
fulfil their wishes also. Many of our students, even
after completing M.Sc. or MBA, again apply for Ph.D.
Their intention is to stay with Swami for a few more
years. They desire for all these degrees only to be with
Swami. On the other hand, those students who
purchase education (in other places) long to leave their
institutes and go in search of jobs as soon as they
receive a degree. Our students are not like that. Along
with degrees, they also possess good character. They
conduct themselves in a befitting way.